Remarks Brian Wichmann might once have made about Paranoia.

1) When working on Pascal compiler validation on a ________ in 1985, we looked around for some sample numerical code. We discovered a publicly available BASIC program called Paranoia from Prof. William Kahan at U.C. Berkeley.

2) Paranoia was just 669 lines long and was known to exercise the edges of a machine's arithmetic. It was stand-alone by design, requiring no significant runtime support. And Paranoia was, in a sense, self-diagnosing, given that it reported its findings about a machine's arithmetic. All of these features made it an attractive validation candidate.

3) Paranoia was really a 669x80 block of ASCII text, with occasional lines much longer. Multiple colon-separated statements appear per line. Many loops were coded on a single line of text.

4) Perhaps due to the constraints of BASIC on the original IBM PC, Paranoia had very few comments. At the end of the program, a block comment provided a glossary of many of the variables. They were all globals, and the form X or Y2, in BASIC style.

5) Not every variable was in the glossary, and some that were could be used for other purposes before they took their appointed role. I gave human-readable names to many values, but not all.

6) After several splash screens of information for the user, Paranoia just proceeded as a flow of dozens of different tests. There are a modest number of utility functions, but most of the program is just the sequence of tests, run just once.

7) Some of the more subtle tests, like square root, used GOSUB routines. I created Pascal subroutines using the BASIC line numbers as names. Like the BASIC, they relied on a significant amount of global state.

8) The REPEAT .... UNTIL ... construct matched the BASIC code well. There were some WHILE ... DO ... loops, too.

9) Paranoia made no attempt to look at the representßation of numbers and it created no data structures, so there were certain language features it did not exercise.

10) Paranoia did examine rounding behavior closely. It stimulated exponent underflow and overflow, which could be problematical in the 1980s. It even computed quotients like 1/0 and even 0/0, but with user options to skip those tests.

11) Because the BASIC code was very regular, much of the translation was _________ , but it was a lot of work.
<<<Was there a bunch of regex massage, to change variable names, break lines up, add semicolons, ...? The change from C to Python was mader much easier in a modern editor>>>

12) We found some compiler bugs, thanks to this significant exercise.

13) I'm happy to know that this translation spawned a widely used C version, a Modula 2 translation, and later Fortran, Python, and even Forth versions. The C version has been widely used in other validations.
